President -elect Donald Trump is expected
to name Stephen Miller as White House
deputy chief of staff for policy.
Miller is Trump's top immigration advisor.
He is a lead architect of Trump's plans
for mass deportation of undocumented
immigrants, and he has said that a second
Trump administration would seek a tenfold
increase in the number of deportations to
more than one million per year.
Joining us now for more on this is former
Obama Homeland Security Secretary Jay Johnson.
He is also a partner at Paul Weiss.
Nice to see you.
Thanks for your time.
So Stephen Miller, as I noted, is seen as
an architect of Trump's mass deportation plan.
What is your reaction to this news?
Pam, any administration in the
enforcement of immigration law and policy
has to have priorities.
Mass deportation, the phrase mass
deportation, is a bumper sticker.
It's a rallying cry.
But any administration, whether it's
Trump, whether it's Biden, Obama, Bush,
has to have priorities.
And the priorities are the most dangerous
among undocumented immigrants.
I want to see ICRO going after the
criminals, going after the national
security threats.
When they're released from jail, turn
them straight over to ICE for deportation
after they've been ordered deported from
our country.
And I know Tom Holman knows that as well
because he used to work for me at DHS.
So I want to follow up with you on that
because you did work with Tom Holman.
Tom Holman is very anti -sanctuary cities.
What you said, though, is you said, look,
they should be handed over to federal
authorities in sanctuary cities.
That's not typically allowed.
So what do you say to that?
And what do you say about Tom taking on
this role as borders are?
Well, you know, I've dealt with a lot of
major cities, big city mayors when I was
in office about the sanctuary city movement.
And we were able to get a fair amount of
traction when it came to working with
mayors saying, look, we need you to give
us the most dangerous in your jails who
are undocumented for the sake of the
public safety of your own citizens.
Now, Tom, I worked with a lot and he was
with me when he was at ICE.
He was very definitely pro enforcement.
I don't recognize, frankly, the Tom
Holman I hear public speaking these days,
but he does understand the hurdles and
the law.
I don't understand the appointment of Tom
Holman as a border czar responsible for
border security, aviation security,
maritime security.
That's the job of the secretary of
Homeland Security.
That's 60 or 70 percent of the job.
And it is entirely within the Department
of Homeland Security.
Normally, you appoint a czar to lead an
interagency multi -department effort.
So I have a lot of questions about this appointment.
So you think, though, that the fact that
he does have operational experience and
understands that complexities could be a
positive, though?
Yes, I do.
Tom understands the complexities of
immigration law and enforcement.
But this idea of some sort of mass
deportation is, frankly, not workable.
I'd much rather see ICE go after the
criminals versus somebody who's been in
this country for 10 and 15 years,
committed no crimes, has a small
business, and has U .S. citizen children.
These are people who are de facto Americans.
Go after the criminals.
So let's talk a little bit more about
that, because, you know, you say go after
the criminals.
We've actually heard from J .D. Vance,
for his part, right, and others close to
Trump, that that will be their overall priority.
But at the same time, you're also hearing
Trump say, look, day one, we're going to
focus on mass deportations.
Practically, with a promise like that, I
mean, how do you even do that, and how do
you do it without hurting the economy?
That's a good question.
First, if you're looking for people to
send back, there has to be a final order
of deportation.
If the order is issued in absentia
without the person present, they're
entitled to an automatic rehearing.
They have to have exhausted their appeal
process, and then you have to find them.
And that's not a difficult process.
And by the time you winnow down that
list, it's not nearly as great as you
think it is.
Again, I'd much rather see ICE go after
public safety threats, the criminals,
gang members, and potential national
security threats.
That's where the focus needs to be.
That's where it's always been, including
during the previous Trump administration.
Do you think that the Biden
administration was remiss in not doing
that enough?
No, I won't say that.
I'm sure that the priorities were public
safety threats and the like, because it
was the written policy of my successor,
Ali Mayorkas.
It's all a question of resources, Pam.
How much do you want to devote to this?
But even if Congress gives you endless
amounts of resources, the dangerous among
us have to be the priorities.
I spoke with former Trump acting DHS
Deputy Secretary Ken Cuccinelli last week
about some of the claims.
He wrote the section on immigration in
Project 2025.
I want to play some of what he told me
regarding what should happen with family separations.
When it comes to mixed families, by that
we mean, you may, as you use the example
of a citizen child and illegal parents,
the family's going to make that decision.
The government isn't going to make that decision.
And they'll be given the time to do that,
I expect.
But they're going to have to make that decision.
And their earlier decisions obviously
have brought their family to the point of
having to make that future decision of
where they live and whether they live
together or apart.
And I should also note that Tom Homan on
60 Minutes was asked the question, is
there a way to do this without separating families?
And he said, well, you just, yeah, sure,
you deport the families together.
What is your reaction to that?
Pam, when I was secretary of DHS, the way
I approached this issue is I could not
ask a border patrol agent or an ICE
enforcement agent to do something I
wouldn't do myself.
And I could not pull a father away from a
two -year -old U .S. citizen -born child
at the border or someplace else.
To me, that's an inhumane policy.
Again, the priorities need to be the criminals.
The priorities need to be the public
safety, national security threats.
And there are enough of them in our jails
today to keep ICE very, very busy.
My concern, Pam, about mass deportation,
this notion of mass deportation, it's
going to turbocharge the sanctuary city
movement in big cities such that local
law enforcement will refuse to work with
ICE in getting at the public safety threats.
Jay Johnson, thank you so much.
So interesting to hear your perspective
as the former secretary of DHS and
someone, as we know, to do work with Tom Homan.
We really appreciate your time.
Thank you.